You know, I don't tell this to everybody, but I've read all your books, I think.
I can't say I've read any of your poetry, but I have read all those.
And I guess, you know, I was just talking this over with my wife, and she said, what's your first question?
I said,
How is it that a man with a Ph.D., a poet, comes to write thrillers?
And she said, money, probably.
I think that more...
The weirder thing would be if I started out writing these and went to poetry.
Yeah, yes.
You would really have to ask me, why the hell did you want to go from writing thrillers to writing poetry?
You know, I think, well, obviously that is one of the reasons.
Well, she was teasing and so am I. No, I'm very frank about it.
That is one of the reasons.
I didn't suspect there was this much money.
But, you know, I actually...
I have always loved these kind of books, and I had a sort of midlife intellectual crisis in the university that came seven or eight years ago, I guess, something like that.
I was teaching a class in bestsellers, which I just... Where was this?
This was at Florida International University of Miami, one of the state universities in Miami.
We've got 30,000 students, but nobody's heard of it.
But we have a master of fine arts program in creative writing, and we've got very good students.
It's not a well-known place.
Anyway, I was teaching this class.
My concept for this class was what is, I suppose, more or less conventional with, or was conventional with me at the time.
which was I was gonna choose all these books that I'd never read before, like Gone with the Wind and From Here to Eternity, big bestsellers of the past and a few current bestsellers.
And the idea was to get them in this class and then make fun of them, to ridicule them, to show how inferior they were to the literary canon which my students were literature majors were studying all the time, Faulkner and Joyce, what have you.
what i found was i like these books it shocked me it was the first time i'd ever read you hadn't read them prior to this oh no i'd never read gone gone with the wind can i tell you something i could never finish gone with the wind well i liked it you know i like the movie better yeah well i probably wouldn't have liked it at certain times in my life but i i maybe i was ready for this i don't know maybe i all the the other things were tilting in this direction too but
It doesn't surprise me that she only wrote one book.
Yeah, that's true.
It wasn't like it was this big brainy book.
Yeah.
But the thing about all of these books was that they had and still do have a kind of, despite their awkwardness of style and a lot of the things that I was going to make fun of them, they truly are.
But they engaged you.
They engaged me in a kind of primitive, mythic,
fundamental way that surprised the hell out of me yeah well let me say may i interject um i find you know i'm 50 okay but and i've been a book book critic uh for call miss blah blah for you know close to 20 years and you really you know you you you you are obligated of course to to read and enjoy the serious books however on the other hand i have to say
I'm, you know, my books of preference now these days are books that really entertain me.
Yeah.
In a kind of quasi-cerebral way.
You know, I mean, I don't like the real, you know what I'm saying.
Yeah.
Well, that's what, I mean, that's my midlife crisis, too.
And I mean, I've just come to that point, too, that life's too short to be reading John Hawks and
and John Barth forever again.
I got the new John Barth sitting over here.
I haven't opened it yet.
Well, you know, I mean, I read them in my youth, and I'm glad I did, and I'm glad I laid that foundation.
Did you read Proust in your youth?
Yes.
Did you think you'd pick him up again?
No, no.
I read, you know, Brothers Karamazov and all those things.
I'm glad I had the energy and
I read Moby Dick all the way through, all that stuff.
Yeah.
But, you know, right now I'd rather read Dutch Leonard.
Dutch Leonard.
James Lee Burke and the people.
Jim Burke is great, isn't he?
Oh, he's terrific.
Yeah.
He's a great guy.
And I find those books so much more important and that they are, you know, saving the novel as far as I'm concerned.
I really, I truly believe this and I can give a... Well, give me a quote on that and then get back to where you were.
But...
I'm sorry?
Give me a quote on that, how they use that.
Well, I think they are saving some of the major ingredients, Burke and Dutch Leonard and a whole host of... Russ Thomas, do you read?
Yeah.
And there's a guy here in Boston who just published his first novel called...
I'm looking at it.
Kenneth Abel.
I haven't read it yet, but I'm looking at it.
It's over here.
It's very good.
And it's books like that that I think are saving certain characteristics of the novel that have virtually disappeared in the mainstream.
What separates the good ones from the crowd?
The good thriller?
Yeah.
Well, that they have...
that they have more than just what's on the surface, that they, if you would choose to do a second reading, they would reward a second reading.
They stir you emotionally, they stir you intellectually.
They don't sacrifice any of that to the page turning aspect.
Do you bristle at the suggestion that it is a genre book, that you're writing it within a genre?
Well, I don't bristle, no.
That's just the name of the business, the aspect of the business.
somewhere in my spirit, I sort of slump, I wouldn't say bristle, I'm disappointed in a way when I'm taken as merely this, because I think that comes
mainly from a lack of real knowledge.
Because the fact is that they're just simply are good books and they're good books that are not good books.
I mean, do we really say that P.D.
James is a genre writer, for instance?
Or John le Carre, for that matter?
John le Carre or, you know, there are a lot of people like that.
Ross McDonald, Richard Chandler, the guys of the past, the people who really built the foundation for this kind of serious book that has primer or...
Suspense is a major aspect of it.
So let's go back to your class in Miami.
Okay.
Well, anyway, I was teaching this class, and I found out I liked these classes, our books, and so I had to shift gears in the middle of this course and find some other way to approach these books because I was finding that I was being stirred by them in surprising ways.
And I admitted all this to my students and said, now what do we do?
And so what we did was we kind of accumulated a list of recurrent characteristics that all these books had in common.
And I tried to use Joseph Campbell at that point to inject a kind of mythic structure and talk about
Were these graduate students or undergraduates?
These are undergraduate students.
Joseph Campbell must have really hit.
I think I can make these things fairly accessible.
I don't think they were daunted by any of this stuff.
I'm teasing a little bit.
Go ahead.
Actually, it was one of the best courses I've ever taught, if I recall.
I was thrilled every day to walk in there because we were sort of
redefining our purpose for being in the university and saying, you know, asking why is the sky blue kind of questions.
And it was thrilling.
Why do we believe what we believe?
Epistemological questions.
They were asking why are... For instance, one of the things they did in this class was they examined the various literary prizes, the things that really codified the major
the literary tradition of our time.
How is a Pulitzer Prize, a Pulitzer Prize novel defined?
What goes into the decision making in a National Book Award prize?
Different students research different aspects of this.
Why is one book a bestseller?
What's behind the New York Times bestseller list and so on?
And we just analyzed.
Sounds like a pretty interesting course.
What did you call it?
What did you call the course?
It was called Best Sellers.
Fortunately, it was 14 weeks long because after the first three weeks,
I shifted gears and said, wait a minute, now what?
We're going to start doing a different tank here.
Strictly contemporary, or did you go back?
No, we started with Gone with the Wind.
We did the big books of the, you know, a big book from the 40s, 50s, 60s.
But I mean, the definition of the bestseller is an American book published in this century, I guess.
Yeah, okay.
Right, so it was limited in that way.
But anyway, I'm sorry.
I got you off track with a cute comment.
But one of the things that came out of this class was we accumulated this list of recurrent facts or recurrent images and situations.
And some of them aligned very neatly with Joseph Campbell.
Some of them didn't.
And at the end of this course, I said, geez, look what I got here.
I've got, maybe it's not a prescription.
to write a bestseller.
But a blueprint, maybe.
But it's pretty interesting.
It's a pretty interesting list.
Now, where were you at this point as a writer?
Well, I had written three novels that got great writers of rejection, but they weren't going to be... But you were unpublished.
Yeah, I was unpublished as a novelist.
I had published four books of poetry and
and lots of literary short stories.
Can you nail down the year for me?
You said about seven, was it in fact?
Eighty-five.
Okay, so it was nine.
Yeah.
Okay.
And I published, you know, things in Kenyan Review and Southern Review and Georgia Review and the literary magazines that distinguish the things that get you tenure and promotion.
How old were you at the time?
Oh, eighty-five.
I was born in forty-seven.
So you were, okay.
And this was like about a year and a half before I started, or about a year before I started Undercover of Daylight.
Or maybe I was just beginning to think about it.
So you emerged from the course with this blueprint.
I did.
And I also emerged from the course with a new sense of what I was permitted to do.
And permitted...
a different sense of who my audience might be, that the large audience was fair game.
I didn't have to just please my colleagues and please my graduate faculty from long ago.
I didn't have to write a mainstream book that was respectable and by the gold standard definition of the academic world.
I was just throwing over my
you know, the foundations of my education left and right, and saying that the books that I read with great pleasure and kind of sinful excitement on the weekends were actually the books that I enjoyed more than the books I was teaching in a week.
And those books were, you know, Travis McGee, Elmore Leonard, Robert Parker, and all those books that are in this so-called genre.
So the combination of these things, of feeling that I had failed, really, to write the kind of respectable book that I thought I ought to write, and finding myself falling deeper and deeper in love with these other kinds of books, and then going through this other intellectual crisis that I did during that year, I had a summer off, and I just sat down and wrote and read the kind of books that I really liked.
that's the kind of book I'm going to write.
Where did the character come from, this Thorne character?
Well, I was living in Key Largo at the time, which was the other magical ingredient in here.
I had moved out of Miami, which was a 50-mile drive to get down to the upper Key Largo.
And that also took me by surprise.
I wanted simply just to have a life that was a little less...
of an urban life, more like the kind of life I grew up in in Kentucky, which was a small town life.
And what I found was that I was surrounded by all these really interesting characters.
I felt like I'd landed on Mars.
And I had all of a sudden the excitement of an anthropologist, I guess, you know, coming to a foreign culture, and everybody just seemed freakishly wonderful.
And
My next door neighbor became Thorne.
He was not living quite as Henry David Thoreau type of life is Thorne, but he was, he is, he was and is a very,
separated from the culture.
Did he build his house from Philippine mahogany?
Well, I met the guy that did that, yeah.
Yeah, I did meet that guy.
He lives there, and he's a carpenter and a woodsmith.
They really do send stuff over to Philippine mahogany.
Absolutely.
Is that unbelievable?
I know, I know.
I'm an old Navy guy, and I spent a lot of time in the Philippines.
It's horrifying.
I just came back from Borneo and Sumatra in Singapore doing research on this new book and got to see these mountains that are just stripped bare.
Unbelievable.
You're talking about they're never learning the lessons that all these other countries in the world, the first world countries, have learned.
you shouldn't be doing this.
This is a disaster, but we go in there and tell them don't do this, and we sound extremely hypocritical and patronizing.
I'm sorry, but anyway, go back to Thorne.
Yeah, well, Thorne was based on a conglomeration of people that I really met in Key Largo, and I felt a sense that I was changing intellectually, emotionally, my whole
The rhythms of life were different there.
I was more oriented to the water and to the nature than I'd been in years, years.
I'd once been very much oriented that way as a young man growing up, and I'd just been totally distracted by urban life for 20 years.
This was a real liberation in lots and lots of ways, and I'm still not over it.
I'm still coasting on that five years that I spent in Key Largo, even though now I live back in Miami.
I live on a couple of acres of very removed, very natural kind of environment.
Now, who's the fly tire?
Well, this guy, my next-door neighbor, was a charter fisherman, and he did bun fishing.
He showed me a lot of things about tying flies and about fly fishing for bonefish and took me out many times.
So I got the kind of zen hunting quality that Thorne feels.
I learned that from this guy and then I pursued it myself with mixed results, low results actually.
But Thorne is obviously my
idealized version.
Um, of whom?
I mean, of yourself?
What I wish to be and what I see in others that I admire.
Because there are plenty of people that are, I mean, Thorne is not an exaggeration.
There are plenty of people that are better than he is in many ways in living that life that he lives.
I mean, this guy that built his house out of these packing crates, um,
He doesn't have any plumbing or any electricity.
He lives in as primitive a way as a person could possibly live, and he's just a wonderful guy.
Sells his carvings and his wood creations at a little artistic co-op place in Pew Argo, and there are just a whole lot of people like that that are still living lives that are
not counterculture lives, not lives that grow out of whole earth catalogs or anything like that, but lives that are simply self-chosen lives.
They're not chosen from some kind of institutional model.
Wonderful people, interesting people that came there precisely because it's a place that has this history of don't tread on me
I'll be however the hell I want to be.
There is, of course, in all of your books a pretty strong, I don't want to mix my metaphors here, but there is a current of an environmental concern that you certainly express, I think, in all of your books.
That's true.
And are all of these things fairly well researched when you talk about what's happening to the coral reefs and stuff?
I spend, before I actually start, I guess other people do work different ways, but the thing that gets me started, I don't do outlines.
I don't think about who the characters are.
I go out and do what amounts to kind of journalistic research.
I go to the
go to places, research that's kind of like in the mean high tide book.
I went to fish farms and talked to people about salapia, biologists, fish farmers, and so on.
I do library research, computer research, spend usually a month or so going places, meeting people, doing things of that kind.
Like the love of the coral book, I went to a bunch of
multiple sclerosis meetings where the newly diagnosed patients went and talked to neurologists about their disease and just got infected by the emotion
nature of this you know is that pretty much i mean is that is that i'm going back to the coral book i remember that that was caused by uh i mean purportedly these diseases were caused by illegal dumping it well that's because i recollect i never actually make that uh firm connection because it's not it's not clear and it's still not not discovered what the root cause of
MS is.
Nobody knows.
But I mean, so much of it in this, but that is documented, though.
Is that where you have other cases where you have?
There are documentations of this aerial spraying that took place in Key West that the military did of this particular bacteria.
And yes, the dumping, the high incidence of MS does exist way, way out of proportion to what it should.
Yeah, so you have that.
All that's true.
It's also true that there's a real high incidence of MS around the garbage dump at the hospital.
The nurses at the hospital have an extraordinarily high incidence of MS.
So, you know, there are lots of little physical evidence, but I can't.
In good conscience, I can't make the final job.
Yeah, well, it's a novel, too.
You have this license.
Yeah, thank God.
Now, that was not a Thorne book, as I recall.
Right, that was Doug Yenelmeyer and a guy named Shaw Chandler.
But I thought he was Thorne.
He was Thorne-like.
He was based on a guy, a fishing buddy of mine, who's a paramedic that I go out with all the time.
I just love this guy.
I had a sense, no, you had left Norton, I think that book was with Knopf.
That was with Knopf, yeah.
And when I was very, the first two foreign books with Norton, they used a modification of the same jacket.
Right.
Which I thought was terrific, by the way.
Well, good, yeah.
And, of course, they probably own it right over at Norton.
Yeah, they do.
But what I thought I was doing is, I didn't write about it, but I said this could almost be a publishing company
kind of product identification, you know, where you get to... I think that's what they had in mind.
And it's just that Sonny Mehta was real interested in luring me away and off getting some money out and I went over there.
And otherwise, Norton had been wonderful to me.
And I think that was a very good idea of trying to have a uniform package.
I've probably been hurt in the long run by not letting them...
you know, continue that build the way they were doing it.
But now I've found home with Delacorte.
I mean, these people, they're trying to find that same uniform package.
They're much, much better than anybody I've been with.
Why did you decide to, was there a contractual thing with Norton, why you didn't do the next book or so about Ford?
Yeah, I'd run through the whole course of the contract with them, and then I would,
up for grabs.
Actually, they rejected Buns of Coral.
They didn't like it.
Really?
Which released me.
Oh.
So that was the option book.
They had the first option.
They rejected it.
They didn't like it.
They thought it was too violent.
You do leave a lot of blood on the carpet.
I know, I know, and I'm trying to improve on that.
I mean, come on, Shakespeare leaves a lot of bodies on the table.
Titus Andronicus, right?
Imagine if that's the only play you ever wrote.
I didn't invent the blood thing.
I mean, there's always been blood on the carpet.
I mean, they deliver heads, don't they, in Titus Andronicus?
Well, I just read this new bestseller, you know, the one, The Day After Tomorrow.
Oh, yeah.
Well, I've heard mixed things.
I tell you, I read it.
I read the whole thing.
But I do not get all this hype.
That's my friend, Les Dandiford, who reviews...
He reviews for the Chicago Tribune.
He wrote a review for Newsday on that book, and he hated it.
I'm telling you, I'm writing for a number of newspapers, by the way, and they want me to do this magazine on Long Island I'm going to be writing for this summer.
I'm starting off with a... I don't have to tape this, do I?
I'm going to check.
That's great.
Okay, here we are.
We're back live.
So...
Where were we?
Where do we pick up the thread?
Have they done any movies of... I mean, I should think this would be a pretty interesting... They've gone through the process on all of them and somewhere else.
They've all been optioned.
And the farthest along, in the help of God, was Bones of Quirrell that was with MGM.
And they had a script.
I wrote the first couple drafts of scripts and they fired me.
It was too close to the book.
I wouldn't do what they wanted me to do, which was to cut Dougie and Elmira totally from the movie, which was, you know, they said that Kevin Costner or Tom Cruise would never be in the movie if they knew that there was a character that had more interesting lines.
Anyway, they got a director, Hugh Hudson, who did Chariots of Fire, British director, very good, went on campaign war, a stylish guy.
They got a script they liked, everybody was happy about it, and it got all the way up to Alan Ladd, Jr., who was then the president of GM, and he turned the project down because they had left out what, to him, was a major aspect of the story, which was basically Alan Ladd's story, a story about a son forgiving his father for being abusive and neglecting him.
Now, can I interject?
It seems to me you're knocking off some pretty important characters.
I thought Darcy was going to be around for a couple of books.
Well, see, my feeling is I've got lots of characters left.
And also, if you don't care about who dies, then it's just a generic body on the rug.
If you're not emotionally hooked.
I tried my best to keep Darcy alive.
In fact, the first draft of that was Darcy was alive.
But she was in a coma.
Well, forget it.
It didn't work.
We don't want a vegetative Darcy.
I know.
I mean, she was going to come out of it.
But the question was, how do you keep her alive but not have her spill her guts and tell the secret and short-circuit the whole story?
And, you know, so you have all these scenes with Thorne looking at her vinyl signs.
Big deal.
No, that doesn't, yeah.
There was no drama there.
There was no excitement there.
So she had to die.
She had to go.
Yeah, she had to go.
I had her, at one point, she cut off her hand, you know, back up.
Oh, Christ.
To get free of that bull and died on the way up.
And this was this heroic, grim, terrible thing.
But I thought I'd just let her drown instead of...
You know what I have to complain about?
Yeah.
The dust jacket.
Not the dust jacket, but the blurb.
Oh, which one?
I mean, I really resent dust jackets inside the things that happen.
Oh, yeah.
You know, the author should write the blurbs.
Would you have put on the blurb that Darcy's, that I guess it's necessary, but it happens pretty early in the book anyway.
It's a second chapter, but still, I don't know who, I don't get a right to okay those or anything.
I don't have any input in any of that stuff.
They just go on every day.
You think you've got plenty of stories for this guy?
Well, I've got a new book.
that I'm just finishing up, and he's a supporting character.
Thorne is a ride to the rescue.
He sort of is in there, but it's a woman whose story is mainly about, and she catches animal smugglers, and that's why I was over in Borneo and stuff.
Miami, as it turns out, is also
we're very good at being an importation point for wild animals.
Lots of parrots.
Yeah, parrots, well, all kinds, primates, you name it.
It comes through Miami.
Because they're so geared up to look for drugs, they don't give a shit too much about orangutans or whatever else.
These little harmless creatures, what the heck.
Anyway, so Thorne is in the next story.
You know, the problem, of course, is that
I never intended him to be a serious character.
He's too much of a curmudgeon and a strong guy.
He's not a private eye.
It kind of strains credulity for him to... To have so many things working on in Key Largo, no less.
Terrible things.
Yeah, right.
In Key Largo, in this very sheltered life.
I have all these terrible things keep happening.
So...
My job, as I see it, if I choose to accept it, is to, if I'm going to continue with Dorn and not do violence to his character, is to find a way to make him a little more available to future problems.
I was kind of angling with that in Mean High Tide to set Sugarman up with this PI, this broken down PI firm.
so that maybe it's through Sugarman that these things spill over into Dorne's life.
I don't know.
I'm not sure.
But you're wrestling with a delightful problem as a popular continuing character.
Well, it seems to me more realistic and more of the problem that most people have, which is why to get up off the couch.
Which call do we accept?
What stirs us into action?
That's more the contemporary problem than it is.
The private eye is just with his feet up on the desk waiting for the next problem to come in the door, ready to jump up and do it.
And to me, that's not real.
The real thing is, why should we do anything at all when we've got 50 channels we could be watching and things that we can order in?
And I mean, Thorne doesn't have that problem, but his problem is similar to that in a more rustic way.
before I get involved.
So are you a full-time writer now?
No, I still, I'm teaching one course one day a week at the university just to keep my hand in.
Keep my health insurance active.
Tell me about it.
As a full-time freelancer now.
Oh, that's right.
You are full-time now?
Well, not in the news.
I'm writing for a number of newspapers, but on my own.